new installation mode: isolated-mode (#436)
npm/rfcs: accepted/0000-pure-mode.md

> # Pure mode

Reviewer: i don't think "pure" is the right term to use here

Author: I updated the reasoning for choosing the term `pure-mode`. Please have a look, and if you don't agree please explain why.

Reviewer 2: I understand the analogy, and obviously this is pure semantics.

* pure can have negative cultural and historic connotations related to race and religion
* pure implies a value judgement
* the pure function analogy isn't immediately obvious to the reader and wouldn't significantly preload accurate assumptions if they did

Author: Makes sense, I guess we have to find a better name then.

Reviewer 2: Simply "unhoisted mode" might be sufficient.

Reviewer 3: @fritzy I feel like that could have a negative impact on user perception compared to a unique name. Why _wouldn't_ I want my packages hoisted? That sounds like a good thing. Further, "unhoisted" makes the addition of new modes later harder since you'll have hoisted, unhoisted, and <x> where <x> is also conceptually "unhoisted" but that name was already taken.

IMO it's better to not have a negative prefix to describe what this is doing but instead have a direct name.

+1 to "isolated" - of the options here, it feels like the least loaded ("non-flat" suffers from a negative prefix with a new term for a concept that's already defined, "strict mode" is already a JavaScript thing, and "predictable" does have an assertion of value)

Reviewer 4: I will throw another idea: hidden-subdependencies

Author: A poll was created to vote on a name

## Summary

This RFC is a proposal to add a new opt-in installation mode.

This mode would be the missing ingredient to make workspaces truly scalable.

## Motivation

The introduction of workspaces in npm v7 brought the ability to split large codebases into smaller pieces of code with declared dependencies between them.

Several build tools took advantage of these declared dependencies to split the builds into multiple steps (one per workspace) which could be cached or run in parallel. This caching and parallelism usually improves significantly build performance.

The current default installation strategy does not properly communicates to Node.js the information about the dependency graph. Node.js having an inaccurate view of the dependency graph leads the build systems to wrongly skip build operations, leading to risk of bugs slipping through.

The installation mode proposed by this RFC would communicate accurately to Node.js the dependency graph, allowing build tools to correctly reason about it.

## Naming

> The proposed name for this mode is `pure-mode`, meaning "pure" as in "no side effects". This name comes from the parallel with functional programming; in functional programming, functions don't have side effects, in `pure-mode` workspaces have no side effects.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
The proposed name for this mode is `pure-mode`, meaning "pure" as in "no side effects". This name comes from the parallel with functional programming; in functional programming, functions are called `pure` because they don't have side effects, in `pure-mode` workspaces have no side effects.
```

> The proposed name for this mode is `pure-mode`, meaning "pure" as in "no side effects". This name comes from the parallel with functional programming; in functional programming, functions are called `pure` because they don't have side effects, in `pure-mode` workspaces have no side effects.

Reviewer: node module resolution does and *should* mean that a parent package.json's node_modules should be requireable in a child - so i don't think "no side effects" is actually what this would be.

Author: The suggested `pure-mode` requires a package to declare a `peer-dependency` in order to be able to impact the dependencies of its parent. Importing code from one of your siblings without having a peer-dependency declared contributes to the problems that this RFC is trying to solve.

Reviewer: I don’t think that’s sufficient - users will always want every child package to be shared also, whether it’s a peer or not.

Author: Can you clarify the scenario that this mode needs to support?

Is there any data (article, discussion, blog post...) about users expecting to have access to parent's dependencies?

Reviewer: That’s how node has always worked - every use of `require` expects that. That’s not what we’re talking about tho.

I’m claiming that what users want is to have both peers and siblings automatically shared, when matching. Currently, lerna/yarn/npm does this via hoisting, which has tons of drawbacks. I think what we need is a way to do it *not* solely with hoisting.

No matter what, a parent package.json’s node_modules must always be requireable because that’s how node works.

Author: My assumption is that the fact that a package can require its siblings is a side effect of the package managers implementation, not a requirement described anywhere. Or is it specified somewhere?

pnpm and yarn PnP do work without fulfilling this expectation so I would guess that most packages are not relying on it. For the ones that do, it would be very easy to fix by declaring a peerDependency to properly express this expectation.

Reviewer: Absent workspaces, a package can not require its siblings' deps, but it can always require its parent's deps.

PnP has to patch a number of parts of the ecosystem (in its pnp.js file) to ensure things don't break, and both PnP and pnpm have nonzero bugs caused by their approach. I think that it would be a very bad idea for npm to apply this approach, *especially* only on workspaces.

Author: Discussed during the RFC call and @ljharb said that this is not a concern for him anymore.

When converting the dependency graph to a folder structure, `hoisted-mode` loses information. Multiple different dependency graphs can be converted to an identical folder structure. Since the folder structure is all that Node.js uses to resolve modules, Node.js misses some information about dependencies. This loss of information is most frequently visible through the fact that workspaces are able to successfully import the dependencies declared by other workspaces.

### Forgetting to declare dependencies

When workspaces can successfully use code of a package without having a dependency on it, people forget to declare their dependencies. This lead to situations where updating the dependencies of one workspace breaks a seemingly unrelated workspace.

It is worth noting that static code analysis tools can help significantly reduce the frequency of these mistakes.

### Duplication

> The `hoisted-mode` is not always successful at sharing common dependencies. Conflicts in versions lead to packages being installed multiple times on disk. These conflicts become more frequent when the project scales. The frequency of these conflicts can be reduced by an effort to align dependencies' versions across the project.

Reviewer: "sharing" is i think the key word here. I've discussed this concept on the RFC call multiple times; basically, every package.json should have a node_modules next to it, full stop.

However, other sibling packages, and *also* any common peer deps between sibling packages, should be *shared* - without hoisting.

Author: Are you suggesting that this new mode should be called `shared-mode`?

Reviewer: Yes, and that it should automatically share both duplicate peers as well as child packages.

Author: hoisting is also a sharing mechanism so `shared-mode` does not really contrast with hoisting.

Author: I know, but this hoisting is sharing 95% of the time. So should we call this new mode "100% sharing-mode"?

Reviewer: Hoisting is sharing *all* of them. The new mode I think we need is sharing only peers and siblings, which imo is the only thing everyone actually wants.

That parent package's deps are requireable in children isn't hoisting, it's just a natural artifact of the way node's always worked, and no workspace mode should interfere with that.

Author: Making sure that I understand your point well @ljharb :
If packages `foo` depends on `bar` and `cat`, you are saying that `cat` should be able to require `bar` even if no peer dependency to `bar` in declared in `cat`'s package.json?

Author: Discussed during the RFC call and @ljharb said that this is not a concern for him anymore.

## How does it work?

This strategy is based on the fact that [Node.js module resolution algorithm](https://nodejs.org/api/modules.html#modules_all_together) follows symlinks and works with them exactly the same as if they were real folders.

Additionally, once a module is resolved, the resolution algorithm calls 'realpath()' on the result. This means that the resolution algorithm always returns a real path. This allows to setup an arbitrary complex dependency graph while making sure Node.js does not create more than one instance of a given module.

## Detailed Explanation

### Structure

In the workspaces:

- Each workspace has its own `node_modules` folder.
- Each `node_modules` folder contain symlinks.
- The symlinks in a `node_modules` folder correspond to the matching workspace's dependencies.
- Each symlink is given the same name as the dependency it represents.
- Each symlink points to a location in the package store where the corresponding package is installed.

In the package store:

> - The package store is a folder stored in the root level `node_modules` folder.

Author: Is it clearer now?

                │
 foo@1.0.0  ────┴─────> baz@1.3.0

```

#### Circular dependencies

Circular symlinks are allowed by the OS and _most_ tools work well with them. So this is not a major concern.

Since the hash of a package contain its dependencies, circular dependencies make the calculation of this hash more complicated. Here is [an article](https://www.fugue.co/blog/2016-05-18-cryptographic-hashes-and-dependency-cycles.html) explaining how to hash a graph with cycles.

### Simple example

#### Dependency graph

```
  root
   ┬
   │
   ├───> foo (workspace)
   │      ┬
   │      │
   │      └───> A @ 1.0.0
   │              ┬
   │              │
   │              └───> B @ 1.0.0
   │
   ├───> bar (workspace)
   │      ┬
   │      │
   │      └───> A @ 1.0.0
   │              ┬
   │              │
   │              └───> B @ 1.0.0
   │
   └───> cat (workspace)
          ┬
          │
          └───> B @ 1.0.0

```

#### Installation on disk

```
  root /
   ┬
   │
   ├─> node_modules / .npm / ─┬─> A@1.0.0-21f95f7 / node_modules / A / ─┬─> [content of package A]
   │                          │                                         │

>    │                          │                                         └─> node_modules / B ( symlink to ../../../../B@1.0.0-0d98566/node_modules/B )

Reviewer 4: This is not a good idea. This will result in circular symlinks. The symlink to be should be at 

```
├─> node_modules / .npm / ─┬─> A@1.0.0-21f95f7 / node_modules / B
```

From the docs of pnpm

> avoid circular symlinks. Dependencies of packages are placed in the same folder in which the dependent packages are. For Node.js it doesn't make a difference whether dependencies are inside the package's node_modules or in any other node_modules in the parent directories.

https://pnpm.io/symlinked-node-modules-structure

Author: Thanks a lot @zkochan, it makes total sense, I updated the RFC

                     │
                     └─> bar / ─┬─> [ content of workspace bar ]
                                │
                                └───> node_modules / ─┬─> A ( symlink to ../../../node_modules/.npm/A@1.0.0+B@2.0.0-66fe689/node_modules/A )
                                                      │
                                                      └─> B ( synlink to ../../../node_modules/.npm/B@2.0.0-a2ia56/node_modules/B )

```

## Performance

Compared to the current npm installation strategy, this proposal reduces package duplication, making the installation process faster. On a prototype, this installation strategy brought down the install time from 6 to 2 minutes on a large monorepo of 500+ workspaces.

## Configuration

The `pure-mode` is a project level setting, it does not make much sense to install some dependencies in `pure-mode` and others in `hoisted-mode`. For this reason, to configure a project in `pure-mode`, a setting has to be added to the `.npmrc` of the project and the lockfile has to be re-generated. A tool may be made available to convert `hoisted-mode` lockfiles to `pure-mode` lockfiles.

## Compatibility

### Different versions of npm

> As workspaces are supported only from npm version 7, there is no concern about making `pure-mode` compatible with versions olders than 7.0.0. 

Reviewer 3: perhaps worth only supporting `package-lock` v3 or even a new v4 and above, then?

I honestly would not mind a feature this impactful being available starting in a new semver major to both make it clear which versions are supported by the feature and provide a good incentive to update.

Reviewer 5: The new mode does bring very significant performance improvements,  however as an opt-in `pure-mode` can be introduced as a semver minor.

Author: The package-lock does not appear to need an upgrade to support `pure-mode` because it already support describing symlinks.

Shipping this mode in a major release may simplify the compatibility story, I will let the npm CLI team judge what is best here.

Author: We have decided to that using pure-mode will not affect the lock file at all, this mode will only affect how packages are laid out on disk but the lock file will stay the same.

The tree structure will be serialized to the lockfile in a way that any version of npm 7.0.0 can understand. This means that any version of npm 7 will be able to install a project configured in `pure-mode`.

Modifying a dependency in a `pure-mode` project with a version of npm not supporting `pure-mode` is likely going to leave the project in a broken state and should be avoided.

When using `pure-mode` it will be recommended to properly configure the `engines` field of the `package.json` to make sure developers who want to modify the dependencies don't shoot themselves in the foot and put the project in an instable state.

### Projects not using workspaces

> The `pure-mode` will also be available for projects not using the workspace feature. This is useful as a library author, using `pure-mode` gives me the guarantee that my library will work as intended when consumed by projects which use `pure-mode`.

Reviewer 3: Disappointed to see that non-workspaces projects are excluded from `pure-mode`. I don't fully understand what the assertion about being useful as a library author is... could you expand on that and why it's a good justification for preventing `pure-mode` from being used by non-workspaces projects?

Author: @bnb you must have read too fast. The proposal is to make `pure-mode` available for non-workspaces projects.

## Prior Art and Alternatives

### [pnpm](https://github.com/pnpm/pnpm)

Package manager with a `pure-mode`.
This RFC is mostly inspired by pnpm.

### [ied](https://github.com/alexanderGugel/ied)

Package manager with a `pure-mode`.
Similar to pnpm but unmaintained.

### [nix](https://nixos.wiki/wiki/Nix)

Functional package manager. Can work with npm packages (eg. [node2nix](https://github.com/svanderburg/node2nix) or [nixfromnpm](https://github.com/adnelson/nixfromnpm) )

### [yarn](https://yarnpkg.com/)

Package manager with a `pure-mode` and project manager.

### [Import maps](https://github.com/WICG/import-maps)

Standard supported by [a few browsers](https://caniuse.com/import-maps) and [deno](https://deno.land/) which makes it possible to implement `pure-mode`.

## Unresolved Questions and Bikeshedding

- Should we use symlinks or junctions on Windows? Both of them have drawbacks:

  - Junctions have to be representated by an absolute path, this means that junctions cannot be committed to git or packed into a package.

>   - Symlinks can only be created in elevated shell [or when Windows is in "developer mode"](https://blogs.windows.com/windowsdeveloper/2016/12/02/symlinks-windows-10/#LCiVBWTgQF5s7fmL.97).

Reviewer 3: I don't think it's unreasonable to ask people to turn on `developer mode` or run in an elevated shell, but I could be wrong.

Author: I will leave that decision to the npm CLI team. I am comfortable with either.

Author: Junctions will be used. We will make an option to opt-in symlinks later if there is a need for it.

   │
   └─> workspaces / ─┬─> foo / ─┬─> [ content of workspace foo ]
                     │          │
                     │          └───> node_modules / ─┬─> A ( symlink to ../../../node_modules/.npm/A@1.0.0+B@1.0.0-21f95f7/node_modules/A )
                     │                                │
                     │                                └─> B ( synlink to ../../../node_modules/.npm/B@1.0.0-0d98ab/node_modules/B )
                     │
                     └─> bar / ─┬─> [ content of workspace bar ]
                                │
                                └───> node_modules / ─┬─> A ( symlink to ../../../node_modules/.npm/A@1.0.0+B@2.0.0-66fe689/node_modules/A )
                                                      │
                                                      └─> B ( synlink to ../../../node_modules/.npm/B@2.0.0-a2ia56/node_modules/B )

```

## Performance

Compared to the current npm installation strategy, this proposal reduces package duplication, making the installation process faster. On a prototype, this installation strategy brought down the install time from 6 to 2 minutes on a large monorepo of 500+ workspaces.

## Configuration

> The `pure-mode` is a project level setting, it does not make much sense to install some dependencies in `pure-mode` and others in `hoisted-mode`. For this reason, to configure a project in `pure-mode`, a setting has to be added to the `.npmrc` of the project and the lockfile has to be re-generated. A tool may be made available to convert `hoisted-mode` lockfiles to `pure-mode` lockfiles.

Author: I think we agree here, I used the term 'project' to mean the entire repo. I rephrased this paragraph so it should not be confusing anymore.

### [pnpm](https://github.com/pnpm/pnpm)

Package manager with a `pure-mode`.
This RFC is mostly inspired by pnpm.

### [ied](https://github.com/alexanderGugel/ied)

Package manager with a `pure-mode`.
Similar to pnpm but unmaintained.

### [nix](https://nixos.wiki/wiki/Nix)

Functional package manager. Can work with npm packages (eg. [node2nix](https://github.com/svanderburg/node2nix) or [nixfromnpm](https://github.com/adnelson/nixfromnpm) )

### [yarn](https://yarnpkg.com/)

Package manager with a `pure-mode` and project manager.

### [Import maps](https://github.com/WICG/import-maps)

Standard supported by [a few browsers](https://caniuse.com/import-maps) and [deno](https://deno.land/) which makes it possible to implement `pure-mode`.

## Unresolved Questions and Bikeshedding

- Should we use symlinks or junctions on Windows? Both of them have drawbacks:

  - Junctions have to be representated by an absolute path, this means that junctions cannot be committed to git or packed into a package.
  - Symlinks can only be created in elevated shell [or when Windows is in "developer mode"](https://blogs.windows.com/windowsdeveloper/2016/12/02/symlinks-windows-10/#LCiVBWTgQF5s7fmL.97).

>   - answer: junctions by default and symlinks as opt-in

Author: agreed. Updated this part

### [yarn](https://yarnpkg.com/)

Package manager with a `pure-mode` and project manager.

### [Import maps](https://github.com/WICG/import-maps)

Standard supported by [a few browsers](https://caniuse.com/import-maps) and [deno](https://deno.land/) which makes it possible to implement `pure-mode`.

## Unresolved Questions and Bikeshedding

- Should we use symlinks or junctions on Windows? Both of them have drawbacks:

  - Junctions have to be representated by an absolute path, this means that junctions cannot be committed to git or packed into a package.
  - Symlinks can only be created in elevated shell [or when Windows is in "developer mode"](https://blogs.windows.com/windowsdeveloper/2016/12/02/symlinks-windows-10/#LCiVBWTgQF5s7fmL.97).

  - answer: junctions by default. support for symlinks can be added later as an opt-in if we see value for it.

- How much community code will break when the system forbids access to undeclared dependencies? In other words, how much code needs to be fixed to work properly in `pure-mode`?

>   - Regarding packages with missing dependencies in the package.json files. The vast majority of the package owners are happy to fix them and the rest simply need to know that this fix is necessary to make their package work great with npm. So the number of packages with missing dependencies is expected to drop fast after npm release `pure-mode`. We may want to later add a feature to npm which allows users to locally declare dependencies on behalf of packages, though this should just be a stop-gap solution.

Reviewer 3: I've found it's often not productive to assume how maintainers are willing to maintain their packages. While I generally don't disagree, I think it would be helpful to not codify assumptions.

```suggestion
  - Regarding packages with missing dependencies in the `package.json` file. In many cases, package owners are willing to fix such issues. If there are a significant number of issues encountered around this, we can likely expect the of packages with missing dependencies is expected to drop fast after npm release `pure-mode`. We may want to later add a feature to npm which allows users to locally declare dependencies on behalf of packages as a stop-gap, if existing solutions to this are not enough.
```

>   - There don't seem to be any package out there that depend on the way hoiting work as a feature. If this is the case, it would be easy to argue that these packages should only rely on the npm and the Node.js contracts/APIs and not on implementation details like hoisting.

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
  - There don't seem to be any packages out there that depend on the way hoisting works as a feature. If this is the case, it would be easy to argue that these packages should only rely on the npm and the Node.js contracts/APIs and not on implementation details like hoisting.
```

Reviewer: This line is incorrect - eslint-plugin-import relies on this, does everything in the babel and eslint ecosystems, because these things have non-javascript config files, referencing package names, that are not in the dependency graph of the main CLI.

Author: This is a good point, the config files of babel/webpack/eslint... which support simply giving a package name will be broken by the pure-mode. Fortunately, all these tools also allow .js config files which can contain `require.resolve(aPlugin)`, so repos using pure-mode may need to update their config files.

Reviewer: That would be forcing people to use JS for config, which is not universally considered a good practice.

The tools allow logicless config, and it is simply *not viable* to dismiss those projects with "psh, just change your config files or you can't use this new mode".

Author: Developers will be able to keep using their tools and their config files by adding the packages referenced in the config files as dependencies in the top level package.json. This is because dependencies of the top-level package.json are globally accessible within the repo. This is simply not the recommended approach.

Author: Discussed during the RFC call and @ljharb said that this is not a concern for him anymore.
